Catalysis is the process of increasing the rate of a chemical reaction by adding a substance known as a catalyst.
Catalysts are not consumed in the reaction and remain unchanged after it.
If the reaction is rapid and the catalyst recycles quickly, very small amounts of catalyst often suffice.
mixing, surface area, and temperature are important factors in reaction rate.
Catalysis is ubiquitous in chemical industry of all kinds.
Estimates are that 90% of all commercially produced chemical products involve catalysts at some stage in the process of their manufacture.
The SI derived unit for measuring the catalytic activity of a catalyst is the katal, which is quantified in moles per second.
The productivity of a catalyst can be described by the turnover number.
In general, chemical reactions occur faster in the presence of a catalyst because the catalyst provides an alternative reaction pathway with a lower activation energy than the non-catalyzed mechanism.
An example of heterogeneous catalysis is the reaction of oxygen and hydrogen on the surface of titanium dioxide to produce water.
Catalysts enable pathways that differ from the uncatalyzed reactions.
These pathways have lower activation energy.
Consequently, more molecular collisions have the energy needed to reach the transition state.
Hence, catalysts can enable reactions that would otherwise be blocked or slowed by a kinetic barrier.
In the catalyzed elementary reaction, catalysts do not change the extent of a reaction.
Catalysts have no effect on the chemical equilibrium of a reaction.
The ratio of the forward and the reverse reaction rates is unaffected by the catalysts.
The second law of thermodynamics describes why a catalyst does not change the chemical equilibrium of a reaction.
Introducing the catalyst to the system would result in a reaction to move to the new equilibrium, producing energy.
Production of energy is a necessary result since reactions are spontaneous only if Gibbs free energy is produced.
Some so-called catalysts are really precatalysts. Precatalysts convert to catalysts in the reaction.
Heterogeneous catalysts act in a different phase than the reactants.
Most heterogeneous catalysts are solids that act on substrates in a liquid or gaseous reaction mixture.
Important heterogeneous catalysts include zeolites, alumina,[15] higher-order oxides, graphitic carbon, transition metal oxides, metals, and vanadium oxide.
A heterogeneous catalyst has active sites, which are the atoms or crystal faces where the reaction actually occurs.
Thus, not only most of the volume but also most of the surface of a heterogeneous catalyst may be catalytically inactive.